Linking urban design to sustainability: formal indicators
of social urban sustainability field research in Perth,
Western Australia
Sergio Porta1* and John Luciano Renne2
1Dipartimento di Progettazione dell’Architettura, Politecnico di Milano, Facolta `di Architettura Civile,
via Durando 10, 20168 Milano, Italy
2Planning and Transport Research Centre, Murdoch University, South Street, Murdoch,
Western Australia 6150, Australia
The making of a livable urban community is a complex endeavor. For much of the 20th Century planners
and engineers believed that modern and rational decision-making would create successful cities. Today,
political leaders across the globe are considering ways to promote sustainable development and the
concepts of New Urbanism are making their way from the drawing board to the ground. While much has
changed in the world, the creation of a successful street is as much of an art today as it was in the 1960s.
Our work seeks to investigate ‘street life’ in cities as a crucial factor towards community success. What are
the components of the neighborhood and street form that contributes to the richness of street life? To answer
this question we rely on the literature. The aim of the Formal Indicators of Social Urban Sustainability study
is to measure the formal components of a neighborhood and street that theorists have stated important in
promoting sustainability. This paper will describe how this concept helps to bridge urban design and
sustainability. It will describe the tool and show how this was applied in a comparative assessment of
Joondalup and Fremantle, two urban centers in the Perth metropolitan area.
URBAN DESIGN International (2005) 10,51–64. doi:10.1057/palgrave.udi.9000136
Keywords: sustainable; street; indicators; social; Australia
Formal indicators concept:
a bridge between urban design
and sustainability
Face-to-face human interactions on the stage of
public life are extremely relevant for supporting
livability, safety and control, economic develop-
ment, participation, and identity (Jacobs, 1961;
Goffman, 1963, 1967; Lemert and Branaman,
1997). Many researchers like Oscar Newman,
William Whyte and Jan Gehl focus their research
on the observation of people in real-life situations
to determine how the built environment impacts
social wellness (Newman, 1973; Gehl, 1987, c.
1980; Whyte, 1988). The results of their studieshelped guide designers to rethink the impact of
their plans upon real life. For example, Oscar
Newman’s studies led to the call for ‘defensible
space’ to help create a safe environment.
The recent sustainability agenda has called for the
integration of economic, environmental, and
social concerns when planning future develop-
ment. The problem for urban designers is where
does the design fit into sustainability? Design can
promote and/or hinder economic, environmental,
and social processes. Indicators must be created to
quantify the formal components of the design in
order to determine the impact upon the level of
sustainability. The formal indicators concept helps
to bridge urban design and sustainability because
it allows for the design of streets and neighbor-
hoods to be measured and compared. The concept*Correspondence: Tel: þ39 02 2399 5680, Fax: þ39 02 2399
5637, E-mail: sergio.porta@polimi.it
URBAN DESIGN International (2005) 10, 51–64
r2005 Palgrave Macmillan Ltd. 1357-5317/05 $30.00
www.palgrave-journals.co.uk/udi
of sustainability is only useful if we can gauge the
impact of development upon the economy, the
environment, and the wellness of the community.
Does the design of streets and neighborhoods
encourage more people to walk or drive? What, in
particular about the design, promotes this activ-
ity? The Formal Indicators Concept seeks to
quantitatively measure graphic representations
of spaces to provide answers to these questions?
The results of our research allow for both a
systematic assessment of existing urban settings
(analysis) and measurement of plans to compare
different alternatives.
This concept is useful because it allows planners
and designers the ability to breakdown the design
of a street and/or neighborhood to determine the
positive and negative attributes. This is a tool and
does not prescribe what is ‘good’ or ‘bad’ design
but it helps for a local discussion to define ‘good’
and ‘bad’. This enables a bridge between urban
design and sustainability because now the mea-
surements taken can be applied to factors of
sustainability, framing the debate on the city form,
at the micro level, within a Sustainable Develop-
ment Indicator (SDI) environment. Planners will
benefit because they can evaluate the streets in
their cities that are most successful and use this
tool to help invigorate streets that are not by
understanding where the design fails. While
social outcomes are not dependant solely upon
design, it is difficult for a street to be successful if
it is poorly designed.
How to use the tool
The formal indicators concept is based on the
representation of spaces. The first step in the
process is to define how to represent the space
and the second step is to measure the representa-
tion. The representations used are: plans, bird-eye
views (ie photographs), and sections. This study
utilized two types of indicators: urban fabric and
street indicators. Next, this section will use the
results of the field research in Western Australia
in order to define each indicator. The field
research has been carried out by a team work
which included Erik Stanton-Hicks, Daniel
Colgan, and Sarah Bolitho at the ISTP, Institute
of Sustainability and Technology Policy, Murdoch
University in Perth, WA; Juliette Louis processed
all quantitative information.Urban fabric indicators
Developed by the Western Australia Ministry for
Planning, urban fabric indicators measure the
scale of the district or the neighborhood. Under-
pinning the development of these indicators is the
assumption that ‘traditionally’ designed town
centers or suburbs are more sustainable in respect
to social equity, economic stability and the
protection/enhancement of the environment,
compared to ‘conventionally’ designed places.
Traditional suburbs are defined as ‘A center with
either a 400 to 800 meter radius that has a range of
community facilities, a mix of housing, substan-
tial local employment as is linked to other
suburban centers by public transport. It has a
safe, attractive and well-defined public realm of
interconnected streets fronted by buildings, and a
well-used public open space y’ (Ministry for
Planning, 2001).
Eight urban fabric indicators were used including:
accessibility (pedsheds), land use diversity, pub-
lic/private realm, natural surveillance (fronts and
backs), permeability/street connectivity, employ-
ment density, number of buildings, and number
of lots.
Accessibility (Pedsheds)
The mapping of a ‘pedshed’ or walkable catch-
ment enables an assessment to be made about the
interconnectedness and accessibility of the street
network for pedestrians. To map the pedshed, a
400- and/or 800-m circle is drawn around a
transit stop which assumes a 5- and 10-min walk,
respectively. The pedshed shows the percent of
the circle that is truly accessible based on safety,
sidewalk connectivity, and street layout. As seen
in Figure 1, Fremantle is substantially more
walkable than Joondalup.
Land use diversity
This indicator measures the variety of land uses
within the walkable catchment area. A high value
of diversity may increase consumer choice a
greater degree for maintaining an urban lifestyle
without increasing the need for motorized move-
ments. Traditional developments should have a
higher level of land use diversity than conven-
tional developments. Fremantle performs remark-
ably higher than Joondalup especially for retail
and the fine-grained diffusion of diverse land-
uses.
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
52
URBAN DESIGN International
Public/private realm
Public realm mapping identifies where the public
can or cannot go (where the public cannot readily
access 24 h a day). Areas in the public domain are
places that individuals are free to go to at any
time and may include public parks and open
space, streets and sidewalks, and public parking
lots. Mapping these areas gives an indication of
how legible an area is in terms of coherence of
urban form; that is, how easy it is for an
individual to understand where to go and not to
go in the city.
Natural surveillance (fronts and backs)
Natural surveillance provides an increased secur-
ity for the pedestrian due to the feeling of ‘eyes on
the streets’ (Jacobs, 1961) and enhanced capability
of territorialization for inhabitants and users
(Newman, 1973, 1996). Front and back mapping
identifies areas of streets that have active building
frontage, which helps to promote a better natural
street surveillance (see Figure 2 and Table 1).
Streets that are poorly designed with respect to
this indicator contain blank walls, high fences,
parking lots or the backs of commercial buildings.
Permeability (street connectivity)
The type and number of intersections in an area
effects the movement by users in that given space
and the user legibility of the street network(Table 2). Four-way intersections offer both
physical and visual directness of movement to a
destination. T-junctions give a reduced choice in
movement and force a change in direction. Cul-
de-sacs are highly undesirable because they
disrupt the flow of movement. To achieve a high
level of permeability a street network should
contain a high proportion of four-way intersec-
tions, few cul-de-sacs, and small street block sizes.
Number of buildings and number of lots
These final urban fabric indicators help to give an
indication of the scale of the measurement area.
Resulting figures show that different street lay-
outs generate quite different performances as for
both the number of stand-alone buildings (96 in
Fremantle, 69 in Joondalup) and the number of
lots (354 in Fremantle, 87 in Joondalup).
Street indicators
These indicators help to isolate the individual
components that as a whole either add to or
subtract from street vitality. This dissection will
help planners to understand the building blocks
of a successful (or unsuccessful) street. Whether
the street is planned or built, these indicators can
be used to improve the vitality of a street.
This study measured existing streets in Fremantle
and Joondalup, Western Australia. Measurements
Figure 1. Urban fabric indicators: pedshed maps of Fremantle (left, 52% coverage) and Joondalup (right, 29%
coverage).
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
53
URBAN DESIGN International
were taken using photographs along the center of
the street, 25 m apart. A camera was attached to a
tripod at eye level to ensure that each photograph
was capturing the same field of view. Once the
photographs were developed, each photograph
was analyzed to gather the measurements for theindicators including: sky exposure, fac ¸ade con-
tinuity, softness, social width, visual complexity,
number of buildings, sedibility, and detractors.
Each photograph was scanned and a computer
program was used to make precise measure-
ments. The following section will describe each
indicator and the method for measurement.
Although this project used photos from existing
streets, measurements could be taken from ‘vir-
tual’ streets built in a 3D program. This could help
planners to correct problems before the project is
built.
Sky exposure
Sky exposure is the amount of sky visible in each
photograph, where trees are considered as opa-
que, the same as buildings or other permanent
man-made objects. This measurement seeks to
understand the urban environments’ ability to
encapsulate the pedestrian. The designer can
relate this information to the person’s sense
of intimacy through enclosure, their sense of
Figure 2. Urban fabric indicators: ‘front and back’ maps of Fremantle (left) and Joondalup (right).
Table 1 Urban fabric indicators: ‘front and back’ measurement
Fronts on fronts Fronts on backs Backs on backs Total
m%m%m% m
Fremantle 2451 36.5 2874 42.8 1386 20.7 6711
Joondalup 1029 26.0 1512 38.3 1409 35.7 3950
The table highlights remarkable differences in terms of total amount of streets as well as their natural surveillance potential.
Table 2 Urban fabric indicators: street connectivity
measurement
Intersection
typeNumber Number
(km2)Points
allocatedScore
4 Ways
F1 6 3 2 2 3 2
J 8 16 16
T Junction
F2 9 5 8 1 2 9
J1 1 2 2 1 1
Cul-de-sac
F1 2 /C01 /C01
J3 6 /C03
Total
F4 6 9 2 6 0
J2 2 4 4 2 4
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
54
URBAN DESIGN International
livability (the street becomes like a living room),
the sense of orientation and definition in space,
and their sense of security.
To obtain the measurement, polylines were drawn
in AutoCAD along the perimeter of the sky visible
in each photograph. Areas of polygons were then
automatically calculated and this number was
inversed so that larger areas resulted in lower
values in the database. Figure 3 represents streets
with high, medium, and low values for sky
exposure.
Fac¸ade continuity
Fac¸ade continuity is a measure of the continuous-
ness of the building fac ¸ade on a place that follows
the line of sight. The continuity of building fronts
adds to a sense of enclosure and definition of the
public space. As such, this indicator could be seenin close relationship with the sky exposure
indicator, as a component of street intimacy. This
indicator also examines the building fronts as a
precondition for establishing a good relationship
between the private space and the public space of
streets. As such, this indicator describes the
potential of a street scene to offer a sense of
diversity. Using AutoCAD, this indicator was
measured with a line drawn about 3 m above the
ground for the whole portion of each street
border. Next, polylines were created to identify
the parts of the area between the ground and the
top line that were discontinuous. Figure 4 depicts
three examples of high, medium, and low levels
of fac ¸ade continuity.
Softness (transparency and transitional space)
Softness measures the subjective elements that
make a street environment feel safe and welcom-
Figure 3. Street indicators: samples of sky exposure
from the higher (top) to the lower (bottom).
Figure 4. Street indicators: samples of Fac ¸ade con-
tinuity from the higher (top) to the lower (bottom).
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
55
URBAN DESIGN International
ing. This is a compound indicator: its two
elements are transparency and transitional space.
Transparency is a measure of the amount of
window space/area that fronts onto the street,
allowing viewing into and out of the buildings.
Transitional space is a measurement of spaces –
visually accessible front yards, stoops, porticos,
verandas, shelters, entry setbacks, balcony awn-
ings, or the like – that provide a ‘soft’ transition
from the very private space to the public realm.
Transparency and transitional space were mea-
sured independently and then averaged to get an
overall measure for softness. In AutoCAD, poly-
lines were drawn to define the presence of
transparencies and transitional spaces and each
were calculated. The total measurement was
separately calculated for each of the two elements
and then the average was taken. Due to the
different nature of each sub-indicator, the data
were normalized before calculating the average.
Figure 5 shows examples of high, medium, and
low ratings for softness.
Social width
Social width refers to the breadth of the street as it
affects human interaction across the traffic area.
This is a measurement of the restriction (‘sever-
ance’ effect) that traffic lanes and multi-functional
lateral or median strips (parking strips, bike lanes,
etc.) place on human interaction from one curb of
a sidewalk to another. It also measures the
interaction between people and activities taking
place mainly at the ground floor of fronting
buildings. Therefore, it is only the areas where
humans cannot stand and interact that are
measured. This indicator has been calculated
based on personal judgment, according to the
following criteria: Rating 5: Narrow pedestrian
street or narrow one-way street that is open to
traffic with or without parallel parking; Rating 4:
Larger one-way street with parking on one side, a
two-way street with one side of parking, or two-
way street with no parking; Rating 3: A two-way
street with parking on both sides (parallel or
angled); Rating 2: A two-way street with a large
median or lateral strip(s) and parking (parallel or
angled); Rating 1: Two-way streets with four lanes
(with or without a small median strip) and with
or without parking (see Figure 6).
Visual complexity
Visual complexity is a measure of the amount of
variety in the streetscape. It seeks to describe thedegree that the street is a rich visual tapestry. The
particular multi-dimensional nature of a concept
of ‘visual variety’ is best evaluated in four
different sub-areas:
1. color (high contrast, brightness, richness, and
the number of different colors);
2. fac ¸ade (attractive fences, attractive height
articulation and details in roof lines, balconies,
verandas, and the number of different
materials);
3. street furniture (seating, art, attractive lamp
posts, raised planters, etc.);
4. street pavement (changes in texture, color,
material, patterns, and attractive edging).
Similar to the social width indicator, visual
complexity was also judged based on personal
Figure 5. Street indicators: samples of softness from
the higher (top) to the lower (bottom).
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
56
URBAN DESIGN International
judgment. Each photograph was evaluated four
times – one for each field – with reference to a 1–5
scale shown in Figure 7. The output was then
calculated as the average of all four areas.
Number of buildings
The number of buildings refers to the apparent
quantity of buildings visible in the pictures. It is a
very simple measure of the ‘scale’ of the city, a
factor which in many ways affects the street life,
as many buildings often implies many entries,
many windows, many different people and
activities. The ratings for this indicator were
divided into a scale from 1 to 5 shown below.
Rating 5: 12 or more buildings visible; Rating 4:
9–11 buildings visible; Rating 3: 4–8 buildingsvisible; Rating 2: 1–3 buildings visible; Rating 1:
No buildings visible (see Figure 8).
Sedibility
William H. Whyte stated that ‘sedibility’ is the
principle design factor in contributing to the
social success of urban plazas in New York
(Whyte, 1988). Sedibility is the measure of the
number of seating opportunities visible in each
photograph (ie benches, low walls, cafe ´chairs,
etc.). To measure this, a distinction was made
between primary and secondary seating. Primary
seating constitutes objects made for people to sit
on which include benches and chairs (moveable
chairs were given a slightly higher rating).
Secondary seating opportunities are objects not
specifically made for the purpose of seating
Figure 6. Street indicators: samples of social width –
from the higher (top, rating 5) to the lower (bottom,
rating 1).
Figure 7. Street indicators: samples of visual complex-
ity – from the higher (top) to the lower (bottom).
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
57
URBAN DESIGN International
but on which people actually are very likely to
sit on. This includes walls, stoops, fountain
borders, ledges, planters, etc. Assessing the
photographs, a scale from 1 to 5 was used, giving
more weight to primary seating as shown below
(see Figure 9). Rating 5: Continuous cafe ´strip,
alfresco dining; Rating 4: Medium number of
primary seating with or without other secondary
seating; Rating 3: A small amount of primary
seating or a couple of benches, or a lot of
secondary seating; Rating 2: Some secondary
seating with our without one bench; Rating 1:
No seating.
Detractors
Detractors refers to any element that can be
viewed as having a negative effect on thestreetscape potential to provide a good scene for
the flourishing of urban social life. These have
been broken down into three sub-indicators
including: blank walls, aggressive automobile
facilities, and rejecting objects. Blank walls are
walls without windows, doors or other openings.
Using AutoCAD, polylines and circles measured
these elements from each photograph. Aggressive
automobile facilities include any feature added to
the streetscape that augments the role of cars or
caters to motorists, in particular: traffic signs or
lights, gas stations, parking lots, and billboards.
Last, rejecting objects include any permanent or
semi-permanent feature that is part of the
streetscape and detracts from the sense of
security, hospitality, and friendliness of the street.
Examples include: poor-quality graffiti, large
dumpsters, and low-quality light poles. Each
Figure 8. Street indicators: samples of number of
buildings – from the higher (top, rating 5) to the lower
(bottom, rating 1).
Figure 9. Street indicators: samples of sedibility – from
the higher (top, rating 5) to the lower (bottom, rating 1).
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
58
URBAN DESIGN International
sub-indicator was normalized before calculating
the average (see Figure 10).
Results of the field research in Western
Australia: Fremantle and Joondalup
Urban fabric and street indicators were processed
in order to produce maps and a database of the
two cases. Using AutoCAD and ArcVIEW, the
database was linked to polygons on maps of
Joondalup and Fremantle. The resulting graphics
were used for developing the first of the four
layouts of the study: the photo-by-photo maps of
each street indicator (Figure 11). These layouts
allow for an in-depth, indicator-by-indicator
comparison of the two cases. The study of everysingle street may also take advantage of the
detailed description provided with this layout.
In the photo-by-photo maps – the first layout – the
legend was built on an average-and-standard-
deviation basis: blues show value below the
average, reds above the average.
The same was then done for the second layout:
the street-by-street table . This analysis (see Fig-
ure 12) allows for a quick evaluation of the
performance of each street, on average, for each
indicator: this helps to highlight strengths and
weaknesses of each street or groups of streets
and leads to a better understanding of general
trends.
Next, the third layout was a set of pie-charts
(Figure 13) based on data of each indicator with
reference to the whole case. This allows for a very
effective understanding of the overall character of
the two cases as well as of the main differences
between them.
Finally, a cluster analysis was used on the photo-
by-photo database (Figure 14) aimed at grouping
together data, which resulted similar when all the
eight street indicators are simultaneously consid-
ered. That led to the fourth layout: a sort of zoning
map that eases the linking of highlighted weak-
nesses and strengths to specific areas of the
two urban fabrics. This seems to be crucial for
the aim of targeting the right policies to the right
places.
Conclusion: the relevance of the formal
indicators concept and tools
A large gap was detected between Fremantle and
Joondalup. Despite the valuable strategies and
guidelines used to design the new town of
Joondalup, the traditional, late-Victorian urban
fabric of Fremantle fairs superior. In particular,
the streets of Joondalup came out to be simply too
large to work well in social terms; moreover, a
sort of ‘withdrawal of the city from the city’s
scene’ was recognized in Joondalup, where very
often the borders of the streets do not show the
presence of buildings, lined trees, shops or the
clues of any human activity.
The indicators allowed for a number of detailed
observations pointing at several specific spots
Figure 10. Street indicators: samples of detractors –
from the higher (top) to the lower (bottom).
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
59
URBAN DESIGN International
Figure 11. Street indicators, samples of Layout 1 ‘Photo-by-photo map’. (a) Sky exposure in Fremantle (left) and
Joondalup (right). (b) Fac ¸ade continuity in Fremantle (left) and Joondalup (right). (c) Softness in Fremantle (left) and
Joondalup (right). (d) Social width in Fremantle (left) and Joondalup (right).
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
60
URBAN DESIGN International
within the two cities, and issues related to local
conditions were discussed to improve upon the
urban form. In particular, large institutional
locations in Joondalup seem to be designed in a
manner that works against, rather than for the
city, while Fremantle still needs to develop a
strategy for urban parking lots and multistory
parking. In both cases, a specific policy for
diffusing sedibility resulted to be strongly
needed, even if Fremantle does show the presence
of some very sedible spots like the ‘cappuccino
strip’.
Results of the four layouts helped to draw both
general and specific conclusions. The generallessons, which were summarized as the 10 ‘rules
of thumb’ for designing sustainable streets of the
future, were drawn as follows (this applies to
mostly to downtown areas or commercial centers,
but may have applicability in other parts of the
city as well):
1. Design streets as narrow as possible (to
accommodate the pedestrian over the auto-
mobile).
2. Do not isolate buildings (especially institu-
tional buildings) in lots; buildings should line
the streets.
3. Do not allow setbacks: building fronts should
be as continuous as possible along the street.
Figure 12. Street indicators, samples of Layout 2 ‘Street-by-street table’: groups of streets (top) and the case of
Fremantle (bottom).
Figure 13. Street indicators, samples of Layout 3 ‘Pie charts’: Fac ¸ade continuity in Fremantle (left) and Joondalup
(right).
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
61
URBAN DESIGN International
Figure 14. Street indicators, samples of Layout 4 ‘Cluster analysis’: zoning maps of Fremantle (top) and Joondalup
(bottom).
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
62
URBAN DESIGN International
4. Make many small buildings instead of few
large ones.
5. Design retail at the ground floor wherever
possible.
6. Avoid parking lots: on-street parking is much
better; even multistory parking is better,
provided that retail is located at the ground
floor facing the street and the fac ¸ade of the
parking deck is disguised to blend into the
architectural environment.
7. Design porticos, arcades, low fencing, stoops,
shelters and the like: everything that can
provide a soft transition from the street to
the building is crucial.
8. Avoid blank walls. Avoid large billboards,
traffic lights, large on-street trash dumpsters,
high light poles, but especially: avoid blank
walls!
9. Put trees on wide streets: trees are very often
the only thing we can do for making existent
streets more lively and friendly, but they can
make a big difference.
10. Places for sitting are all-important:
provide sedible arrangements wherever
possible.
The formal indicators analysis developed for
the comparison of Fremantle and Joondalup
proved to be highly descriptive of the urban
environment at the microlevel of the neighbor-
hood (commercial center) and the street. It
allowed for an in-depth understanding of
some formal characteristics of the urban fabric,
which in many ways can be related to the
social sustainability of places. Moreover, it high-
lighted relevant differences in the physical
settings of the two cases, which are generally
under-represented in the political agenda as well
as in the planning debate and in the social
awareness of the local community. Policies
can be undertaken to better the social value of
urban places using strategies of urban design.
A renovated attention needs to be paid to the
contextualization of large institutional buildings,
the strengths and interconnectivity of street
layout, the visual communication between
street fronts, the sedibility of public space,
the use of a tree canopy to reach a better level
of intimacy on (sub) urban streets, the negative
impact of parking lots and blank walls and
the like. Moreover, those policies can be tracked
in time to keep the progressing of their imple-
mentation under the social control of local
communities. SDIs can be the first step inbridging the gap between urban design and
truly achieving sustainability with quantitative
measures.
References
Gehl, J. (1987) Life between Buildings: Using Public Space .
New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Goffman, E. (1963) Behavior in Public Places; Notes on the
Social Organization of Gathering . New York: Free
Press of Glencoe.
Goffman, E. (1967) Interaction Ritual; Essays in Face-to-
face Behavior . Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Jacobs, J. (1961) The Death and Life of Great American
Cities . New York: Random House.
Lemert, C. and Branaman, A. (eds.) (1997) The Goffman
Reader . Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Ministry for Planning. (2001) Sustainable Urban Design:
Practical Fieldwork Project. Booklet presented at the
‘Sustainable Urban Design Course’ 2001, ISTP,
Murdoch University, Perth, WA.
Newman, O. (1973) Defensible Space: Crime Prevention
through Urban Design . New York: Collier
Books.
Newman, O. (1996) Creating Defensible Space. US
Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Office of Policy Development and Research,
Washington, DC, USA.
Whyte, W.H. (1988) City: Rediscovering the Center . New
York: Doubleday.
Further Reading
Bosselmann, P. (1998) Representation of Places: Reality and
Realism in City Design . Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Cooper-Marcus, C. and Sarkissian, W. (1986) Housing as
if People Mattered: Site Design Guidelines for Medium-
Density Family Housing . Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Gehl, J. (1977) Interface between Public and Private
Territories in Residential Areas, Department of Archi-
tecture and Building . Melbourne: Melbourne Uni-
versity.
Gehl, J. (1994) Public Spaces and Public Life in Perth .
Perth: Report for the Government of Western
Australia and the City of Perth.
Gehl, J. and Gemzøe, L. (1996) Public Spaces Public Life .
Copenhagen: Arkitektens Forlag.
Gehl, J. and Gemzøe, L. (2000) New City Spaces .
Copenhagen: The Danish Architectural
Press.
Jacobs, A. (1993) Great streets . Boston, MA: MIT Press.
Jacobs, A. and Bosselmann, P. IDS 241: best students
works at Jacobs and Bosselmann’s IDS 241 course,
UCB Berkeley: Patel B., Chiao C.S., Jung Chin I.
1985. Memorable Street. December 1985; Hilken H.,
Nagle K., Rosenberg M., Sadik R. 1987. Memorable
Residential Streets. Fall 1987; Bergdoll J., Williams
R.W. 1988. A study of Perceived Density. Fall 1988;
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
63
URBAN DESIGN International
Gambetti F., Wolfe M., Broudehoux A.M. 1996.
Elements of Street Memorability: a Study of Grant
and Stockton Streets in san Francisco’s Chinatown.
Fall 1996.
Southworth, M. and Ben-Joseph, E. (1997) Streets and the
Shaping of Towns and Cities . New York: McGraw-
Hill.Ramati, R. (1981) How to Save your own Street . New York:
Doubleday.
Vernez-Moudon, A. (ed.) (1987) Public Streets for Public
Use. New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Whyte, W.H. (1980) The Social Life of Small Urban
Spaces . Washington, DC: The Conservation
Foundation.
Linking urban design to sustainability
S. Porta and J.L. Renne
64
URBAN DESIGN International